README.md, before:

go-carbon [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/lomik/go-carbon.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/lomik/go-carbon)
============

Golang implementation of Graphite/Carbon server with classic architecture: Agent -> Cache -> Persister

![Architecture](doc/design.png)

### Features
* Receive metrics from TCP and UDP ([plaintext protocol](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/feeding-carbon.html#the-plaintext-protocol))
* Receive metrics with [Pickle protocol](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/feeding-carbon.html#the-pickle-protocol) (TCP only)
* [storage-schemas.conf](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-schemas-conf)
* [storage-aggregation.conf](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-aggregation-conf)
* Carbonlink (requests to cache from graphite-web)
* Logging with rotation (reopen log by HUP signal or inotify event)
* Many persister workers (using many cpu cores)
* Run as daemon
* Grace stop on `USR2` signal: close all socket listeners, flush cache to disk and stop carbon
* Alternative grace stop on `USR2` signal (config `dump` section): start write new data to file, stop persister, dump cache to file, stop all (and restore from files after next start)
* Reload persister config (whisper section of main config, storage-schemas.conf and storage-aggregation.conf) on HUP signal

## Performance

Faster than default carbon. In all conditions :) How much faster depends on server hardware, storage-schemas, etc.

The result of replacing "carbon" to "go-carbon" on a server with a load up to 900 thousand metric per minute:

![Success story](doc/success1.png)

## Installation
Use binary packages from [releases page](https://github.com/lomik/go-carbon/releases) or build manually:
```
# build binary
git clone https://github.com/lomik/go-carbon.git
cd go-carbon
make submodules
make

# build rpm (centos 6)
make rpm

# build debian/ubuntu package
make deb

Install debian dependencies: 
apt-get install golang 

# hand-made install
sudo install -m 0755 go-carbon /usr/local/bin/go-carbon
sudo go-carbon --config-print-default > /usr/local/etc/carbon.conf
sudo vim /usr/local/etc/carbon.conf
sudo go-carbon --config /usr/local/etc/carbon.conf --daemon
```

## Configuration
```
$ go-carbon --help
Usage of go-carbon:
  -check-config=false: Check config and exit
  -config="": Filename of config
  -config-print-default=false: Print default config
  -daemon=false: Run in background
  -pidfile="": Pidfile path (only for daemon)
  -version=false: Print version
```

```
[common]
# Run as user. Works only in daemon mode
user = ""
# If logfile is empty use stderr
logfile = "/var/log/go-carbon/go-carbon.log"
# Logging error level. Valid values: "debug", "info", "warn", "warning", "error"
log-level = "info"
# Prefix for store all internal go-carbon graphs. Supported macroses: {host}
graph-prefix = "carbon.agents.{host}"
# Interval of storing internal metrics. Like CARBON_METRIC_INTERVAL
metric-interval = "1m0s"
# Endpoint for store internal carbon metrics. Valid values: "" or "local", "tcp://host:port", "udp://host:port"
metric-endpoint = ""
# Increase for configuration with multi persisters
max-cpu = 1

[whisper]
data-dir = "/data/graphite/whisper/"
# http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-schemas-conf. Required
schemas-file = "/data/graphite/schemas"
# http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-aggregation-conf. Optional
aggregation-file = ""
# Workers count. Metrics sharded by "crc32(metricName) % workers"
workers = 1
# Limits the number of whisper update_many() calls per second. 0 - no limit
max-updates-per-second = 0
# Sparse file creation
sparse-create = false
enabled = true

[cache]
# Limit of in-memory stored points (not metrics)
max-size = 1000000
# Capacity of queue between receivers and cache
input-buffer = 51200
# Strategy to persist metrics. Values: "max","sorted","noop"
#   "max" - write metrics with most unwritten datapoints first
#   "sorted" - sort by timestamp of first unwritten datapoint.
#   "noop" - pick metrics to write in unspecified order,
#            requires least CPU and improves cache responsiveness
write-strategy = "max"

[udp]
listen = ":2003"
enabled = true
# Enable optional logging of incomplete messages (chunked by MTU)
log-incomplete = false

[tcp]
listen = ":2003"
enabled = true

[pickle]
listen = ":2004"
enabled = true
# Limit message size for prevent memory overflow
max-message-size = 67108864

[carbonlink]
listen = "127.0.0.1:7002"
enabled = true
# Close inactive connections after "read-timeout"
read-timeout = "30s"
# Return empty result if cache not reply
query-timeout = "100ms"

[dump]
# Enable dump/restore function on USR2 signal
enabled = false
# Directory for store dump data. Should be writeable for carbon
path = ""
# Restore speed. 0 - unlimited
restore-per-second = 0

[pprof]
listen = "localhost:7007"
enabled = false
```

### OS tuning
It is crucial for performance to ensure that your OS tuned so that go-carbon
is never blocked on writes, usually that involves adjusting following sysctl
params on Linux systems:

```bash
# percentage of your RAM which can be left unwritten to disk. MUST be much more than
# your write rate, which is usually one FS block size (4KB) per metric.
sysctl -w vm.dirty_ratio = 80

# percentage of yout RAM when background writer have to kick in and
# start writes to disk. Make it way above the value you see in `/proc/meminfo|grep Dirty`
# so that it doesn't interefere with dirty_expire_centisecs explained below
sysctl -w vm.dirty_background_ratio = 50

# allow page to be left dirty no longer than 10 mins
# if unwritten page stays longer than time set here,
# kernel starts writing it out
sysctl -w vm.dirty_expire_centisecs = $(( 10*60*100 ))
```

Net effect of these 3 params is that with `dirty_*_ratio` params set high
enough multiple updates to a metric don't trigger disk activity. Multiple datapoint
writes are coalesced into single disk write which kernel then writes to disk
in a background.

With settings above applied, best write-strategy to use is "noop"

## Reported stats

| metric | description |
| --- | --- |
| cache.queueWriteoutTime | Time in seconds to make a full cycle writing all metrics |


## Changelog
##### version 0.8.0
* Fully refactored and optimizer cache module (core of go-carbon) (thanks [Maxim Ivanov](https://github.com/redbaron))
* Added `noop` cache.write-strategy (thanks [Maxim Ivanov](https://github.com/redbaron))
* New optional dump/restore functional for minimize data loss on restart
* Refactored internal stat mechanics. `common.graph-prefix` and `common.metric-interval` now can be changed without restart (on HUP signal)
* Customizable internal metrics endpoint. `common.metric-endpoint` param. Valid values: "local" and "" (write directly to whisper), "tcp://host:port", "udp://host:port"

##### version 0.7.3
* Added `cache.write-strategy` option (values "max" or "sorted") (thanks [Alexander Akulov](https://github.com/AlexAkulov))
* `commitedPoints` metric renamed to `committedPoints`

##### version 0.7.2
* Added sparse file creation (`whisper.sparse-create` config option)
* Enable reload in init script (thanks [Jose Riguera](https://github.com/jriguera))
* Clean up schemas parser code (thanks [Dieter Plaetinck](https://github.com/Dieterbe))
* Better go-whisper error handling (thanks [Hiroaki Nakamura](https://github.com/hnakamur))
* Don't try to create whisper file if exists with bad permissions #21

##### version 0.7.1
* Fixed problem: Points in queue (channel) between cache and persister subsystems was invisible for carbonlink

##### version 0.7
* Grace stop on `USR2` signal: close all socket listeners, flush cache to disk and stop carbon
* Reload persister config (`whisper` section of main config, `storage-schemas.conf` and `storage-aggregation.conf`) on `HUP` signal 
* Fix bug: Cache may start save points only after first checkpoint
* Decimal numbers in log files instead of hexademical #22
* Fix bug: NaN values being saved in Whisper datafiles #17 (thanks [Andrew Hayworth](https://github.com/ahayworth))
* Fix bug: may crash on bad pickle message with big message size in header #30. Added option `pickle.max-message-size` with 64 MB default value
* Improved throttling (max-updates-per-second) performance #32

##### version 0.6
* `metric-interval` option 

##### version 0.5.5
* Cache module optimization

##### version 0.5.4
* Fix RPM init script

##### version 0.5.3
* Improved validation of bad wsp files
* RPM init script checks config before restart
* Debug logging of bad pickle messages

##### version 0.5.2
* Fix bug in go-whisper library: UpdateMany saves first point if many points has identical timestamp

##### version 0.5.1
* Reduced error level of "bad messages" in tcp and pickle receivers. Now `info`
* Configurable logging level. `log-level` option
* Fix `wrong carbonlink request` error in log

##### version 0.5.0
* `-check-config` validates schemas and aggregation configs
* Fix broken internal metrics `tcp.active` and `pickle.active`
* Optional udp incomplete messages logging: `log-incomplete` setting
* Fixes for working on x86-32
* logging fsnotify: fix ONCE rotation bug

##### version 0.4.3
* Optional whisper throttle setting #8: `max-updates-per-second`

##### version 0.4.2
* Fix bug in go-whisper: points in long archives missed if metrics retention count >=3

##### version 0.4.1
* Bug fix schemas parser

##### version 0.4
* Code refactoring and improved test coverage (thanks [Dave Rawks](https://github.com/drawks))
* Bug fixes

##### version 0.3
* Log "create wsp" as debug
* Log UDP checkpoint (calculate stats every minute)
* Rotate logfile by inotify event (without HUP)
* Check logfile opened
* [storage-aggregation.conf](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-aggregation-conf) support
* Create and chown logfile before daemonize and change user
* Debian package (thanks [Dave Rawks](https://github.com/drawks))

##### version 0.2
* Git submodule dependencies
* Init script for CentOS 6
* Makefile
* "make rpm" script
* Daemonize and run-as-user support
* `-check-config` option
* `-pidfile` option

##### version 0.1
+ First full-functional public version
+ Logging with HUP rotation support
+ UDP receiver
+ Tcp receiver
+ Pickle receiver
+ TOML-configs
+ Carbonlink
+ Multi-persister support
+ storage-schemas.conf support

Commit message:

Parallel cache
Part 1 of changes to increase parallelism.

This patch makes receivers to write to cache directly,
instead of sending metrics over a channel. This
removes bottleneck on cache receive side,
allowing up to NUM_SHARDS (currently 128) parallel goroutines
to make progress instead of just 1.

New Cache stores metrics in ConcurrentMap which is an
array of 32 regular maps, each guarded by a separate RWLock.
Map to be used is determined by fnv32 hash modulo 128

Cache process is not responsible for receiving
metrics anymore, instead it prepares writeout queue
and responses to carbonlink requests only.

README.md, after:

go-carbon [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/lomik/go-carbon.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/lomik/go-carbon)
============

Golang implementation of Graphite/Carbon server with classic architecture: Agent -> Cache -> Persister

![Architecture](doc/design.png)

### Features
* Receive metrics from TCP and UDP ([plaintext protocol](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/feeding-carbon.html#the-plaintext-protocol))
* Receive metrics with [Pickle protocol](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/feeding-carbon.html#the-pickle-protocol) (TCP only)
* [storage-schemas.conf](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-schemas-conf)
* [storage-aggregation.conf](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-aggregation-conf)
* Carbonlink (requests to cache from graphite-web)
* Logging with rotation (reopen log by HUP signal or inotify event)
* Many persister workers (using many cpu cores)
* Run as daemon
* Grace stop on `USR2` signal: close all socket listeners, flush cache to disk and stop carbon
* Alternative grace stop on `USR2` signal (config `dump` section): start write new data to file, stop persister, dump cache to file, stop all (and restore from files after next start)
* Reload persister config (whisper section of main config, storage-schemas.conf and storage-aggregation.conf) on HUP signal

## Performance

Faster than default carbon. In all conditions :) How much faster depends on server hardware, storage-schemas, etc.

The result of replacing "carbon" to "go-carbon" on a server with a load up to 900 thousand metric per minute:

![Success story](doc/success1.png)

## Installation
Use binary packages from [releases page](https://github.com/lomik/go-carbon/releases) or build manually:
```
# build binary
git clone https://github.com/lomik/go-carbon.git
cd go-carbon
make submodules
make

# build rpm (centos 6)
make rpm

# build debian/ubuntu package
make deb

Install debian dependencies: 
apt-get install golang 

# hand-made install
sudo install -m 0755 go-carbon /usr/local/bin/go-carbon
sudo go-carbon --config-print-default > /usr/local/etc/carbon.conf
sudo vim /usr/local/etc/carbon.conf
sudo go-carbon --config /usr/local/etc/carbon.conf --daemon
```

## Configuration
```
$ go-carbon --help
Usage of go-carbon:
  -check-config=false: Check config and exit
  -config="": Filename of config
  -config-print-default=false: Print default config
  -daemon=false: Run in background
  -pidfile="": Pidfile path (only for daemon)
  -version=false: Print version
```

```
[common]
# Run as user. Works only in daemon mode
user = ""
# If logfile is empty use stderr
logfile = "/var/log/go-carbon/go-carbon.log"
# Logging error level. Valid values: "debug", "info", "warn", "warning", "error"
log-level = "info"
# Prefix for store all internal go-carbon graphs. Supported macroses: {host}
graph-prefix = "carbon.agents.{host}"
# Interval of storing internal metrics. Like CARBON_METRIC_INTERVAL
metric-interval = "1m0s"
# Endpoint for store internal carbon metrics. Valid values: "" or "local", "tcp://host:port", "udp://host:port"
metric-endpoint = ""
# Increase for configuration with multi persisters
max-cpu = 1

[whisper]
data-dir = "/data/graphite/whisper/"
# http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-schemas-conf. Required
schemas-file = "/data/graphite/schemas"
# http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-aggregation-conf. Optional
aggregation-file = ""
# Workers count. Metrics sharded by "crc32(metricName) % workers"
workers = 1
# Limits the number of whisper update_many() calls per second. 0 - no limit
max-updates-per-second = 0
# Sparse file creation
sparse-create = false
enabled = true

[cache]
# Limit of in-memory stored points (not metrics)
max-size = 1000000
# Strategy to persist metrics. Values: "max","sorted","noop"
#   "max" - write metrics with most unwritten datapoints first
#   "sorted" - sort by timestamp of first unwritten datapoint.
#   "noop" - pick metrics to write in unspecified order,
#            requires least CPU and improves cache responsiveness
write-strategy = "max"

[udp]
listen = ":2003"
enabled = true
# Enable optional logging of incomplete messages (chunked by MTU)
log-incomplete = false

[tcp]
listen = ":2003"
enabled = true

[pickle]
listen = ":2004"
enabled = true
# Limit message size for prevent memory overflow
max-message-size = 67108864

[carbonlink]
listen = "127.0.0.1:7002"
enabled = true
# Close inactive connections after "read-timeout"
read-timeout = "30s"
# Return empty result if cache not reply
query-timeout = "100ms"

[dump]
# Enable dump/restore function on USR2 signal
enabled = false
# Directory for store dump data. Should be writeable for carbon
path = ""
# Restore speed. 0 - unlimited
restore-per-second = 0

[pprof]
listen = "localhost:7007"
enabled = false
```

### OS tuning
It is crucial for performance to ensure that your OS tuned so that go-carbon
is never blocked on writes, usually that involves adjusting following sysctl
params on Linux systems:

```bash
# percentage of your RAM which can be left unwritten to disk. MUST be much more than
# your write rate, which is usually one FS block size (4KB) per metric.
sysctl -w vm.dirty_ratio = 80

# percentage of yout RAM when background writer have to kick in and
# start writes to disk. Make it way above the value you see in `/proc/meminfo|grep Dirty`
# so that it doesn't interefere with dirty_expire_centisecs explained below
sysctl -w vm.dirty_background_ratio = 50

# allow page to be left dirty no longer than 10 mins
# if unwritten page stays longer than time set here,
# kernel starts writing it out
sysctl -w vm.dirty_expire_centisecs = $(( 10*60*100 ))
```

Net effect of these 3 params is that with `dirty_*_ratio` params set high
enough multiple updates to a metric don't trigger disk activity. Multiple datapoint
writes are coalesced into single disk write which kernel then writes to disk
in a background.

With settings above applied, best write-strategy to use is "noop"

## Reported stats

| metric | description |
| --- | --- |
| cache.queueBuildCount | Number of times writeout queue was rebuilt (higher is better) |
| cache.queueBuildTimeMs | Total time spent rebuilding writeout queue. Divide by queueBuildCount to get average rebuild time (lower is better) |
| cache.queueWriteoutTimeMs | Time in milliseconds to make a full cycle writing all metrics. Divide by queueBuildCount to get average writeout time (lower is better) |


## Changelog
##### version 0.8.0
* Fully refactored and optimizer cache module (core of go-carbon) (thanks [Maxim Ivanov](https://github.com/redbaron))
* Added `noop` cache.write-strategy (thanks [Maxim Ivanov](https://github.com/redbaron))
* New optional dump/restore functional for minimize data loss on restart
* Refactored internal stat mechanics. `common.graph-prefix` and `common.metric-interval` now can be changed without restart (on HUP signal)
* Customizable internal metrics endpoint. `common.metric-endpoint` param. Valid values: "local" and "" (write directly to whisper), "tcp://host:port", "udp://host:port"

##### version 0.7.3
* Added `cache.write-strategy` option (values "max" or "sorted") (thanks [Alexander Akulov](https://github.com/AlexAkulov))
* `commitedPoints` metric renamed to `committedPoints`

##### version 0.7.2
* Added sparse file creation (`whisper.sparse-create` config option)
* Enable reload in init script (thanks [Jose Riguera](https://github.com/jriguera))
* Clean up schemas parser code (thanks [Dieter Plaetinck](https://github.com/Dieterbe))
* Better go-whisper error handling (thanks [Hiroaki Nakamura](https://github.com/hnakamur))
* Don't try to create whisper file if exists with bad permissions #21

##### version 0.7.1
* Fixed problem: Points in queue (channel) between cache and persister subsystems was invisible for carbonlink

##### version 0.7
* Grace stop on `USR2` signal: close all socket listeners, flush cache to disk and stop carbon
* Reload persister config (`whisper` section of main config, `storage-schemas.conf` and `storage-aggregation.conf`) on `HUP` signal 
* Fix bug: Cache may start save points only after first checkpoint
* Decimal numbers in log files instead of hexademical #22
* Fix bug: NaN values being saved in Whisper datafiles #17 (thanks [Andrew Hayworth](https://github.com/ahayworth))
* Fix bug: may crash on bad pickle message with big message size in header #30. Added option `pickle.max-message-size` with 64 MB default value
* Improved throttling (max-updates-per-second) performance #32

##### version 0.6
* `metric-interval` option 

##### version 0.5.5
* Cache module optimization

##### version 0.5.4
* Fix RPM init script

##### version 0.5.3
* Improved validation of bad wsp files
* RPM init script checks config before restart
* Debug logging of bad pickle messages

##### version 0.5.2
* Fix bug in go-whisper library: UpdateMany saves first point if many points has identical timestamp

##### version 0.5.1
* Reduced error level of "bad messages" in tcp and pickle receivers. Now `info`
* Configurable logging level. `log-level` option
* Fix `wrong carbonlink request` error in log

##### version 0.5.0
* `-check-config` validates schemas and aggregation configs
* Fix broken internal metrics `tcp.active` and `pickle.active`
* Optional udp incomplete messages logging: `log-incomplete` setting
* Fixes for working on x86-32
* logging fsnotify: fix ONCE rotation bug

##### version 0.4.3
* Optional whisper throttle setting #8: `max-updates-per-second`

##### version 0.4.2
* Fix bug in go-whisper: points in long archives missed if metrics retention count >=3

##### version 0.4.1
* Bug fix schemas parser

##### version 0.4
* Code refactoring and improved test coverage (thanks [Dave Rawks](https://github.com/drawks))
* Bug fixes

##### version 0.3
* Log "create wsp" as debug
* Log UDP checkpoint (calculate stats every minute)
* Rotate logfile by inotify event (without HUP)
* Check logfile opened
* [storage-aggregation.conf](http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/config-carbon.html#storage-aggregation-conf) support
* Create and chown logfile before daemonize and change user
* Debian package (thanks [Dave Rawks](https://github.com/drawks))

##### version 0.2
* Git submodule dependencies
* Init script for CentOS 6
* Makefile
* "make rpm" script
* Daemonize and run-as-user support
* `-check-config` option
* `-pidfile` option

##### version 0.1
+ First full-functional public version
+ Logging with HUP rotation support
+ UDP receiver
+ Tcp receiver
+ Pickle receiver
+ TOML-configs
+ Carbonlink
+ Multi-persister support
+ storage-schemas.conf support
